[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a clinical
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
related disorders i'm also the author of
the book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
and today i'd like to talk a little bit
about the self
essentially pathological narcissism is a
disorder of the self and i'd like to
talk about what that means
the branch of psychology that studies
narcissism is called self psychology
but the concept of a self
is a little difficult to pin down
it's a fluid concept
and when i teach this concept to my
students i ask them to close their eyes
and to think about the experience of
being a self
i ask them what does it feel like to be
you what are the experiences the
memories the affiliations that are
important in your feeling of being a
self
what are the boundaries of that
experience
and i ask them if inside of it
they can find the echoes of important
figures from their past
perhaps their mother father
cherished friends or romantic partners
i asked them if they can find ideas and
concepts
that were important in defining who they
are and what they believe
the longer we look at it
the more apparent it becomes that the
self is highly variable
there seems to be some aspects of it
that remain constant
but there are also some that change
depending on our mental state
heinz kohut was the founder of
self-psychology and he wrote that in
certain psychological states the self
may expand far beyond the borders of the
individual
patriotism is a good example of this
when we have a strong feeling that we're
part of something that extends far
beyond the boundaries of our own skin
but the self may also shrink to become
identical with a single thought feeling
or action
and if you imagine being so embarrassed
by something you've done that you feel
you'll never live it down
in that mental state your experience of
being a self becomes very small
for that brief period of time you in a
sense become your mistake
you become
your feeling of embarrassment
falling in love can have a similar
effect
the self expands and it contracts
and this is especially true when we're
very young and the boundaries of the
self are not yet well established
as it turns out the ways that we're
treated by others
have tremendous impact on our
self-development
those experiences shape and inform how
it feels to be you
empathy and affiliation are the main
building blocks of a healthy self
and for people who were raised in a
positive responsive environment where
they felt they belonged and it felt
consistently seen and understood the
experience of selfhood is mostly
positive
it's mostly well defined and organized
there tend not to be huge distortions in
self-concept
there aren't pieces of the self that
don't fit together well
um or hair trigger reactions to everyday
events like making a mistake or
receiving a small amount of criticism
but not everyone is so lucky
for those who were raised in an
emotionally impoverished neglectful or
abusive environment the self can be
damaged
it may be full of conflict or feelings
of frustration rage shame alienation or
humiliation
and sometimes such feelings are laid
down so early that they become a core
aspect of the self
making it very difficult to feel good
about being you
and they interfere
with attempts to form close
relationships
in response the person might try to
build new parts of the self that aren't
sort of contaminated by those
problematic core feelings and when this
happens we call it the false self
and since the false self is often built
as a defense
against those underlying problematic
feelings it often has a quality of
grandiosity it's as if the person
unconsciously decided that no they're
not broken they're perfect
they aren't in desperate need of love
and understanding they're completely
self-sufficient
because the false self is built on top
of the damaged core
there's a lack of cohesion within the
individual
it's like mismatched puzzle pieces
jammed together
or
being inside of a home that has clashing
and mismatched interior decorating the
experience of moving between rooms in
such a home feels disjointed
it lacks a coherent theme or flow
between spaces
these sorts of structural issues within
the self are actually the cause of
pathological narcissism
the foundations of selfhood are laid
when we're very young but the process of
building and maintaining the self goes
on throughout our lives
we use something called self-object
experiences as the glue that holds the
self together
self objects are sort of like the pieces
of your world that help define your
experience of being a self
and when you're very young
the main self objects were your parents
your caregivers siblings and other
members of your household but later
that self-object pool expanded to
include friends teachers
favorite sports teams or even characters
on television and in movies
i can remember being a kid and wanting
to be indiana jones and superman
as we grow
we require less and less from our
self-objects
infants need constant care and
responsiveness
to keep their sense of being a self
organized and positive
but by the time we're adults most of us
have created largely symbolic self
objects
we're americans or we're democrats or
republicans we're fans of the raiders or
the yankees
we also form self-object relationships
with spouses partners families and
employers and those relationships tend
to be defined by an equal or at least
reciprocal amount of give and take
but for individuals who have a
compromised self the need for highly
responsive and positive self-object
experiences remains very high even into
adulthood
the unstable self needs a kind of heavy
duty glue to hold it together to keep it
from fragmenting or falling apart
and the problems in the self compel the
person to seek constant reassurance from
others
typically in the form of positive regard
but individuals with severely
compromised selves may need more than
just positive regard they may actually
need to feel idealized and since
affiliation is also one of the main
building blocks of selfhood they may in
turn idealize others and use their
affiliation with those people to shore
up their own feeling of being good
enough
since the false self is built on top of
underlying core feelings of shame rage
or alienation
individuals with pathological narcissism
tend to fluctuate between periods of
grandiosity when the self is experienced
as unrealistically positive to periods
of intense shame anxiety or even
depression
when the underlying problems in the self
become exposed
sometimes the self is experienced as
empty
an extremely dysphoric state that often
compels the narcissistic individual
to abuse substances or engage in other
maladaptive behaviors in an attempt to
fill themselves up
we call these negative experiences
narcissistic vulnerability
they can also include things like
internal disorganization lack of
cohesion extreme discontinuities and
self-experience intrusive feelings or
associations feelings of worthlessness
self-directed rage and severe
distortions in the perception of the
self and also of other people
now it's often been observed that the
stereotype of the overconfident
narcissist who's in love with themselves
is largely a myth
such individuals do exist but to be
truly narcissistic their behavior must
be motivated by an underlying deficit in
the self
pathological narcissism is actually
about deficits and disabilities
grandiosity is about the person's
attempt to compensate for those deficits
and disabilities it's a symptom
and just like any other symptom of a
mental illness to truly comprehend it we
need to understand what's happening
underneath
it's also important to remember that
pathological narcissism is actually a
treatable issue
the person needs to want help and they
need to be willing to commit to the
process but the self can be healed
so don't give up hope
when working with narcissistic patients
we often begin by trying to make space
for their vulnerable feelings
noticing together whatever comes up
around those
these are the parts of the patient that
need acceptance and validation
okay well thanks for joining me today
please reach out with questions or
suggestions for future topics and until
next time take good care
[Music]
you